Add pre-merge history expiry page (#1815)
hyperledger/besu-docs: docs/public-networks/how-to/pre-merge-history-expiry.md

---
title: Prune pre-merge history
sidebar_position: 9
description: Reduce the size of your database by removing pre-merge blocks from your blockchain
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Node operators using [Snap sync](../concepts/node-sync.md#snap-synchronization) can significantly reduce

> disk usage by removing [pre-merge](https://ethereum.org/en/roadmap/merge/) (Proof of Work (PoW))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disk usage by removing [pre-merge](https://ethereum.org/en/roadmap/merge/) Proof of Work (PoW)
```

block data from the local database.

> Besu can prune all pre-merge blocks and associated transaction receipts, leaving only headers and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besu can prune all pre-merge block bodies and associated transaction receipts, leaving only headers and
```

Reviewer 2: for context, block bodies are made up of transactions, ommer headers and withdrawals (though no withdrawals pre-merge). The transaction data is by far the biggest part.

the genesis block.

:::warning

> Besu does not currently provide a way to manually import pre-merge block data after pruning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besu does not currently provide a way to import pre-merge block data after pruning.
```

> If you need to restore the full pre-merge history, you can revert to the old sync method and download

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to restore the full pre-merge history, you can revert to the former Snap sync behaviour and download
```

all blocks from peers by setting
[`--snapsync-synchronizer-pre-checkpoint-headers-only-enabled=false`](../reference/cli/options.md#snapsync-synchronizer-pre-checkpoint-headers-only-enabled).

Support for Era1 sync for archive nodes is currently in progress.

:::

Besu provides multiple options to prune the historical blockchain data:
- [Offline pruning](#offline-pruning) to prune data on a stopped Besu instance.
- [Online pruning](#online-pruning) to prune data on a running Besu instance.
- [Sync Besu](#sync-without-pre-merge-blocks) using Snap sync, which by default prunes the historical
    blockchain data.

## Offline pruning

> The easiest and fastest option for pruning pre-merge blocks is to perform an offline prune.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fastest option for pruning pre-merge blocks is to perform an offline prune. It won't prune as much data as a full resync.
```

Reviewer 2: Easiest is probably resyncing, but that has the most downtime.
This is the most number of steps so not easiest.

1. Ensure your Besu instance has stopped, and run the following command:

    ```bash

>     besu --network=mainnet --data-path=/path/to/your/database storage prune-pre-merge-blocks --threads=4 --prune-range-size=12000

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    besu --data-path=/path/to/your/database storage prune-pre-merge-blocks
```

Reviewer 2: threads and range size are advanced options most users shouldn't care about, think we could link to subcommand with the full options instead

    ```
    In the command:
    - [`--threads`](../reference/cli/subcommands.md#prune-pre-merge-blocks) sets the number of processors
        to use during the pruning process. This CLI option defaults to
        one less than the number of processors available on your system, so it's safe to omit.
    - [`--prune-range-size`](../reference/cli/subcommands.md#prune-pre-merge-blocks) specifies the size of
        block ranges to be pruned. The default is `10000` and can be adjusted if desired, although
        this may impact pruning performance.

>     On completion, you'll receive the `Pruning pre-merge blocks and transaction receipts completed` log message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    On completion, you'll receive the `Pruning pre-merge blocks and transaction receipts completed` log message.
    It should only take a few minutes to complete but has been known to take up to two hours on occasion.
```

1. Restart Besu and include the [`--history-expiry-prune`](../reference/cli/options.md#history-expiry-prune)

>     option to reclaim the space.

Reviewer 2: In testing, we saw the space increases by up to 200GB before the space was finally reclaimed. Probably worth a mention.

    ```bash

>     besu --network=mainnet --history-expiry-prune

Reviewer 2: Think we shouldn't give a full example command here because every user should run besu like they normally do, just adding the extra flag.

    ```

    We suggest waiting 24-48 hours for all the space to be reclaimed.

> 1. (Optional) Restart Besu and remove the `--history-expiry-prune` option, since this applies default

Reviewer 2: Wrong way around: Remove the flag then restart

> 1. (Optional) Restart Besu and remove the `--history-expiry-prune` option, since this applies default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (Optional) Remove the `--history-expiry-prune` option and restart Besu, since this applies default
```

> 1. Optional. Restart Besu and remove the `--history-expiry-prune` option since this applies default
>     database garbage collection options to help free up space. Underlying GC options can be tweaked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (Optional) Restart Besu and remove the `--history-expiry-prune` option, since this applies default
    database garbage collection options to help free up space. You can tweak underlying garbage collection options
```

>     database garbage collection options to help free up space. You can tweak underlying garbage collection options

Reviewer 2: The comment about garbage collection makes more sense alongside adding the flag, not removing it. Adding enabled garbage collection, removing the flag disables garbage collection

    separately if necessary.

## Online pruning

> Online pruning allows you to prune the pre-merge blocks on a running Besu instance. Restart your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Online pruning allows you to prune the pre-merge blocks on a running Besu instance. It has the least downtime but may impact normal operations for lower spec users. Restart your
```

Besu node and include the following option:

```bash

> besu --history-expiry-prune

Reviewer 2: Again, think we should mention the additional flag, not a full example command

```

In the command `--history-expiry-prune` enables online pruning of pre-merge PoW blocks.

:::note
The early access option  `--Xpre-merge-pruning-quantity` can be used to specify how many blocks to prune
for each new block added to the chain. For example, `--Xpre-merge-pruning-quantity=10`.
During testing on a 4 CPU machine, we only noticed an impact to Besu when this was tuned to `1000`
:::

The Besu logs will print the progress in the logs, and you'll see the `Done pruning pre-merge blocks.` message
when complete.

## Sync without pre-merge blocks

> By default, syncing a Besu node using `SNAP` sync will prune pre-merge blocks and only retain their headers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option has the most downtime but the most disk space savings.
By default, syncing a Besu node using `SNAP` sync will prune pre-merge blocks and only retain their headers:
```

```bash

> ./besu --sync-mode=SNAP

Reviewer 2: Again, might not be ideal to show full command. Maybe we can just make it clear this should be used alongside their existing options somehow?

```

If you want to download full pre-merge blocks instead, set
[`--snapsync-synchronizer-pre-checkpoint-headers-only-enabled`](../reference/cli/options.md#snapsync-synchronizer-pre-checkpoint-headers-only-enabled)
to `false`.

:::warning
Setting `--snapsync-synchronizer-pre-checkpoint-headers-only-enabled` to `false` will increase the sync time
and disk space usage.
:::

If you're a solo staker, consider using [RocketPool's rescue node](https://rescuenode.com/docs/about)

> to minimise downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to minimize downtime.
```
